ch11/ch11.md, before:

# Algebraic data types and kinds

## Type ctors vs data ctors

- types are static, so type ctors evaluate at compile time
- data ctors evaluate at runtime, at term level

Type ctors without args are "type constants" (eg `Bool`)

Type ctors appear before the `=` in a datatype def'n, data ctors after
- When data ctors take params, those refer to other types
- (possibly parametric, possibly unconstrained)

## Kinds, part 1

Kind `*` is a concrete type, kind `* -> *` is a type ctor waiting to be
applied.

## Arity

Data constructors that take more than one type (arity higher than 1) are
product types (so they're going to admit projections, bifunctors, all
that good stuff)

## Cardinality

Cardinality of a datatype -> number of values it defines (i.e.
cardinality of its set in *Hask*.) Can be 0 for `void` or infinite e.g.
for lists.

## Newtype

`newtype` declarations can only ever have a single unary data ctor,
unlike `data` declarations. So no product types, no sum types, no
nullary (constant) types. The cardinality of a `newtype` is the same as
that of the type it contains.

### y tho
- No runtime overhead, reuses representation of the type it contains
- Simple way to narrow a platform type like `Integer` into a
  domain-specific one
- Unlike a type synonym, you can define new typeclasses for `newtype`s
  -- stuff that isn't contained in the base type

(Skimming the stuff about `GeneralizedNewtypeDeriving` but I guess I
should know it's there.)

## Record syntax

```
data Person = 
    Person {
        name :: String,
        age :: Int
    } deriving (Eq, Show)
```

Unpacking record fields:

```
isTrustworthy :: Person -> Bool
isTrustworthy p
    | age p <= 30 = True
    | otherwise   = False
```

Check out the projection (accessor) `age` in there. Also, warning!
Embedded record types (e.g. "I normal-formed all the things and now I
have a record in a sum-type case", see below) are gateways to partiality
when not every case has the same set of projections (and if they do, um,
why).

## Normal form

Same distributive-law stuff Bartosz wrote about, but expressed in terms
of sum and product types. In particular, a type is in "normal form" when
we've distributed it as much as possible, so it ends up as a sum of
products.

Exactly how helpful is that, though? Well, it brings to mind the post
about too many `Maybe`s in Elm, and data modeling: 

https://robots.thoughtbot.com/modeling-with-union-types

The implication here is that in languages with sum types, we should try
distributing product types over sums where we can and see if we get a
more senible, dare I even say more domain-relevant result. Reaching
first for record types might be the way to start but probably isn't the
way we should leave our code.

## Data type (de)construction
Chicken butt sighting! Waiting for updog or BOFA next.

"Types like this are sometimes used to signal discrete concepts you
don't want to flatten into the unit type." Funny, I was just reading
about the Reader functor and `unit`, this seems potentially applicable.

`data Foo = Foo` improve over type synonyms like `type Foo = String` at
type construction time, in the sense that they demand an explicit ctor.
(See also `newtype`.)

Oh "cool", you can partially define records and they'll warn at compile
time and barf at runtime. Boo hiss. "Either define the whole record at
once or not at all." (See "normal form", above)

Oh nifty (sincere this time), partial application of data constructors.
Makes sense, really we're defining higher-order functions that _return
functions_ that, when provided the right params, will call the data ctor
and get you your shit.

```
data Cat =
    Kitteh String Integer Bool
    deriving (Eq, Show)

namedCat :: Integer -> Bool -> Cat
namedCat = Kitteh "Cleo"

catWithAge :: Bool -> Cat
catWithAge = NamedCat 15

goodKitty :: Cat
goodKitty = CatWithAge True
```

And there's no reason these can't be chained, the type system should
make sure we call them in order:

```
catNamed :: String -> Integer -> Bool -> Cat
catNamed = Kitteh

withAge :: Integer -> (Integer -> Bool -> Cat) -> Bool -> Cat
withAge i k = k i

isGood :: Bool -> (Bool -> Cat) ->  Cat
isGood g k = k g

> isGood True $ withAge 15 $ catNamed "Clio"
Kitteh "Clio" 15 True
```

Okay, that latter example would be better in F#'s idiom:

```
catNamed "Clio" |> withAge 15 |> isGood True
```

but whatever.

Compare and contrast this to a combinator pattern that starts by
building a valid but uninteresting default (say it with me, "monoidal
identity") and lets you tack on values in any order you please. Clearly
there is much to be learned here.

Commit message:

Infix operator names, some stuff on HKTs, binary tree code

ch11/ch11.md, after:

# Algebraic data types and kinds

## Type ctors vs data ctors

- types are static, so type ctors evaluate at compile time
- data ctors evaluate at runtime, at term level

Type ctors without args are "type constants" (eg `Bool`)

Type ctors appear before the `=` in a datatype def'n, data ctors after
- When data ctors take params, those refer to other types
- (possibly parametric, possibly unconstrained)

## Kinds, part 1

Kind `*` is a concrete type, kind `* -> *` is a type ctor waiting to be
applied.

## Arity

Data constructors that take more than one type (arity higher than 1) are
product types (so they're going to admit projections, bifunctors, all
that good stuff)

## Cardinality

Cardinality of a datatype -> number of values it defines (i.e.
cardinality of its set in *Hask*.) Can be 0 for `void` or infinite e.g.
for lists.

## Newtype

`newtype` declarations can only ever have a single unary data ctor,
unlike `data` declarations. So no product types, no sum types, no
nullary (constant) types. The cardinality of a `newtype` is the same as
that of the type it contains.

### y tho
- No runtime overhead, reuses representation of the type it contains
- Simple way to narrow a platform type like `Integer` into a
  domain-specific one
- Unlike a type synonym, you can define new typeclasses for `newtype`s
  -- stuff that isn't contained in the base type

(Skimming the stuff about `GeneralizedNewtypeDeriving` but I guess I
should know it's there.)

## Record syntax

```
data Person = 
    Person {
        name :: String,
        age :: Int
    } deriving (Eq, Show)
```

Unpacking record fields:

```
isTrustworthy :: Person -> Bool
isTrustworthy p
    | age p <= 30 = True
    | otherwise   = False
```

Check out the projection (accessor) `age` in there. Also, warning!
Embedded record types (e.g. "I normal-formed all the things and now I
have a record in a sum-type case", see below) are gateways to partiality
when not every case has the same set of projections (and if they do, um,
why).

## Normal form

Same distributive-law stuff Bartosz wrote about, but expressed in terms
of sum and product types. In particular, a type is in "normal form" when
we've distributed it as much as possible, so it ends up as a sum of
products.

Exactly how helpful is that, though? Well, it brings to mind the post
about too many `Maybe`s in Elm, and data modeling: 

https://robots.thoughtbot.com/modeling-with-union-types

The implication here is that in languages with sum types, we should try
distributing product types over sums where we can and see if we get a
more senible, dare I even say more domain-relevant result. Reaching
first for record types might be the way to start but probably isn't the
way we should leave our code.

## Data type (de)construction
Chicken butt sighting! Waiting for updog or BOFA next.

"Types like this are sometimes used to signal discrete concepts you
don't want to flatten into the unit type." Funny, I was just reading
about the Reader functor and `unit`, this seems potentially applicable.

`data Foo = Foo` improve over type synonyms like `type Foo = String` at
type construction time, in the sense that they demand an explicit ctor.
(See also `newtype`.)

Oh "cool", you can partially define records and they'll warn at compile
time and barf at runtime. Boo hiss. "Either define the whole record at
once or not at all." (See "normal form", above)

Oh nifty (sincere this time), partial application of data constructors.
Makes sense, really we're defining higher-order functions that _return
functions_ that, when provided the right params, will call the data ctor
and get you your shit.

```
data Cat =
    Kitteh String Integer Bool
    deriving (Eq, Show)

namedCat :: Integer -> Bool -> Cat
namedCat = Kitteh "Cleo"

catWithAge :: Bool -> Cat
catWithAge = NamedCat 15

goodKitty :: Cat
goodKitty = CatWithAge True
```

And there's no reason these can't be chained, the type system should
make sure we call them in order:

```
catNamed :: String -> Integer -> Bool -> Cat
catNamed = Kitteh

withAge :: Integer -> (Integer -> Bool -> Cat) -> Bool -> Cat
withAge i k = k i

isGood :: Bool -> (Bool -> Cat) ->  Cat
isGood g k = k g

> isGood True $ withAge 15 $ catNamed "Clio"
Kitteh "Clio" 15 True
```

Okay, that latter example would be better in F#'s idiom:

```
catNamed "Clio" |> withAge 15 |> isGood True
```

but whatever. Note the flipped args.

Compare and contrast this to a combinator pattern that starts by
building a valid but uninteresting default (say it with me, "monoidal
identity") and lets you tack on values in any order you please. Clearly
there is much to be learned here.

## Function types are exponential
Yes, yes, read this in Bartosz and moving on.

Gotta say, jumping between the CT "treating products as times and
coproducts as plus means functions act like expo, isn't this neat the
laws are the same" and the Haskellbook "this is how big your codomain
is" approaches is super helpful, at least to me.

## HKTs
"Kinds are not types until they are fully applied."

`*` is a type, `* -> *` is waiting for one type, `* -> * -> *` is
waiting for two, etc.

Not really following the `Bloodhound` example, but whatever. I guess the
intent is to emphasize that we left the `EsResultFound` type parametric
on `a` so we're not committing to an implementation too early.

## Infix constructors and operators
The section's really titled "list is polymorphic" but there's some good
shit here.

- "When we give an operator a non-alphanumeric name, it's infix by
  default"
- "Any operator that starts with a colon `:` must be an infix type or
  data constructor (except `(->)`, the type ctor for functions)
- Still not sure how `data [] a = ...` makes `[a]` work
